---
layout: post
title: "Weddings"
date: 2019-12-23 11:16:00 +1100
categories: Marriage Weddings Sexuality Relationships Friendship Theology Anthropology.
description: "Last week, I had the privilege of witnessing a very special occasion.  One of my cousins got married to a long-time friend of mine from church and school.  We all practically grew up together: we and our parents all hung out while we all lived close together, we went to many of the same..."
---

Last week, I had the privilege of witnessing a very special occasion.  One of my cousins got married to a long-time friend of mine from church and school.  We all practically grew up together: we and our parents all hung out while we all lived close together, we went to many of the same parties and houses, same church, almost the same school, so basically did a lot of life together.

It was one of those wonderful occasions where life just comes together.  Peoples' worlds collide &ndash; people you see often but also people you haven't seen for years.  In this case, many of my cousins (or at least second cousins) were there, as well as friends from the church I grew up in.  And we all got to see two people make some incredible promises to one another; promises that they will never make to anyone else.  A promise that has been made by many others for millennia: to be solely, voluntarily but covenantally committed to each other, as a uniquely binary union of one man with one woman for life, according to the biblical bonds of marriage.

It got me to thinking of the uniquely wonderful things that marriage (even a wedding day in itself) provides, not just for the couple in question but for the family and friends intertwined with their lives:

1. As previously stated, Weddings are one of the few instances (apart from sadder occasions such as funerals) where people can get together who may not have seen each other for quite a long time.  Old friends from the past, or relatives who may now have their own families and busy lives.  No wedding, or family, or person is perfect.  But it can be an extremely socially unifying event.
2. A wedding begins the process of sanctifying a marriage, or fulfilling it for its original purpose.  It allows two people to work together as a team for the benefit of each other and society ([Genesis 2:18](https://www.bible.com/bible/1713/GEN.2.18.CSB); [Ecclesiastes 4:7-12](https://www.bible.com/bible/1713/ECC.4.CSB)), and for others present to affirm that process.
3. A wedding and by extension, a marriage, can be an implicit proclamation of the good news about Jesus dying to save people from their sin.  When done well, it can be a good explicit declaration of the Gospel.  The Judeo-Christian view of marriage has always been that it is meant to symbolically depict the relationship that God has with his people.  		The lengthiest fleshed-out expression of this model is found in [Ephesians 5:22](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=eph+5%3A21-33&version=CSB).  It is certainly no state secret that this particular text has created a lot of confusion and controversy, especially within the last several decades.  But a big part of the over-arching theme that exists within it is the idea that a husband and wife analogously model the way that Jesus and the church functionally respond to each other.  In a similar way that Jesus did not take advantage of his privileges as the Son of God, becoming a servant to everyone ([Philippians 2](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=philippians+2&version=CSB)), a husband gives up his own concerns to look after the needs of his wife, to live an example of how Jesus lived and died.  And in a similar way (though not so unconditionally) that the church is instructed to submit to Jesus, it does functionally analogise that wives submit to their husbands.

The two people who got married last Saturday, I am sure, are more than capable of responsibly and maturely living out this analogy with care and respect.  I wish all the best for Em and Benji as they start a new stage of life together!