---
layout: post
title: "How Much Grace Should be Given to A Prime Minister Who is Not a Pastor-Theologian? -- A Legitimate Prime Ministerial Dilemma, Part II"
date: 2020-01-08 10:13:29 +1100
categories: Politics Theology Business Scomo PMAustBushfires AustBushfires2019-20.
description: "As discussed previously, it seems that there are at least two major, immediate problems facing our PM in his current position.  One of them is an ethical and functional issue of personal and political priorities, which has already been addressed.  The other issue is one of a more deeply philosophical and social nature.  To a large extent, it involves Scott Morrison's ability to be able, with maturity and sensitivity, to..."
---

This is part II of a two-part series of posts concerning the personal (corporate, political and ideological) responses that have come from Australia's current Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, in response to the bushfire crisis ravaging this country at the moment.  Part I can be viewed [here](https://sugarcanens.github.io/politics/theology/business/scomo/pmaust/bushfires/austbushfires2019-202020/01/04/Family-Business-Emergencies.html).

As discussed previously, it seems that there are at least two major, immediate problems facing our PM in his current position.  One of them is an ethical and functional issue of personal and political priorities, which has already been addressed.  The other issue is one of a more deeply philosophical and social nature.  To a large extent, it involves Scott Morrison's ability to be able, with maturity and sensitivity, to adequately evaluate, as well as satisfactorily interact with the lives, situations, attitudes and feelings of others around him, beyond his own life, assumptions, feelings and social circles.

Time and time again throughout this whole heated saga, we have seen the PM making casual statements which may have seemed small and insignificant to him, yet these are comments that many people from various situational backgrounds have taken great offense to.  There are probably many examples that could be given but here are a couple of statements that have caught the attention of quite a lot of people:

One of the first &ndash; and arguably most notable &ndash; of these instances was from just under a month ago, when the PM rather ignorantly and dogmatically stated, regarding the attitudes of volunteer firefighters towards their jobs that they &ldquo;[... want to be there](https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/dec/10/scott-morrison-rejects-calls-for-more-help-saying-volunteer-firefighters-want-to-be-there)&rdquo;.  It has sparked some rather firm, heartfelt and detailed responses, such as the following video from a volunteer firefighter's wife, which you can watch below and that has gone viral on social media from multiple platforms:

<iframe src="https://www.facebook.com/plugins/video.php?href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.facebook.com%2FTheProjectTV%2Fvideos%2F479864492640865%2F&show_text=0&width=560" width="560" height="315" style="border:none;overflow:hidden" scrolling="no" frameborder="0" allowTransparency="true" allowFullScreen="true"></iframe>

To be fair, you can tell from Morrison's inclusion of the prefaced phrase &ldquo;... they are tired...&rdquo; that he is certainly not assuming that a firefighter's labour is easy, or exciting.  But the crux of his statement really comes down to an issue of definitions.  What did the PM really mean, by definition, when he used the word &ldquo;want&rdquo;? Unless he personally clarifies it, we will never know the answer to this question.  But more than likely, it had to have meant one of two things: either (a) it meant that volunteers have a simple desire to be out there, in that they have a sense of ethical but voluntary duty to themselves, their families, their neighbours and their country; or (b) he actually meant that he thinks this disaster provides some kind of a preferred job, or even positively enjoyable lifestyle for them.  It seems that many people have interpreted his words to infer the latter, which if this is a correct interpretation of his words is troubling.  It is possible that he does not understand what it means to be passionate about one's job, especially when it is not an every-day job but is required due to other (more dangerous) circumstances, taking one away from one's normal life and job.

What makes his comments even more disconcerting is their immediate situational and financial context.  He seems to be using this glib statement as a means of superficially justifying a refusal to immediately offer more professional resources towards the fire disaster, which certainly was the case at the time, even if it is ever so slightly not so much the case now.  He has made this statement amidst a difficult situation where firefighters are voluntarily attempting to provide basic necessities of food and water to surviving victims of bushfires, at the same time as continuing the process of actually attempting to bring those devastating fires under control.  He has underestimated the motivational desires and functional capabilities of the very people whom he claims to be supporting with his own words.  It is relatively clear that he actually does not understand them, where they are coming from and what their real needs are.

Another relevant example would be some [comments](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-03/scott-morrison-responds-to-angry-criticism-bushfire-victims/11839674) from only several days ago.  After being strongly opposed by bushfire survivors for not providing sufficient resources to their satisfaction, he stated in response:

> Well I don't take it personally.  I just see it as a sense of frustration and hurt and loss and anger, that is out there about what is the ferocity of these natural disasters.  And I understand that.  And we will seek to provide that comfort, support, in whatever way we can.

> People are angry, I understand it.

> People have suffered great loss. People are hurting. People are raw. That's what happens in natural disasters.

> And we will continue to stay focused on exerting all of our effort to deliver all of the resources and all of the support to ensure that all of these communities can come through.

> People are angry, and if people want to direct that at me, that is up to them.

> It's not something that will distract me. It is something that I will empathise with.

> It is something that I understand. It's not something for me to take personally.

> My job is to stay focused on ensuring that we have the maximum coordination of effort across many states.

There is a rather poignant and paradoxical two-fold observation that could be made from these statements:
* On the one hand, the PM does not accept the legitimacy of certain words being directed at himself.  He blames the disaster themselves (which is partially valid) but does not accept personal responsibility:  
&ldquo;... I don't take it personally.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;... if people want to direct that [anger] at me, that is up to them.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;It's not something that will distract me.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;It's not something for me to take personally.&rdquo;
* On the other hand, he claims that he &lsquo;<i>understands</i>&rsquo;, even &lsquo;<i>empathises</i>&rsquo; with the situation of suffering survivers:  
&ldquo;... that [hurt and anger] is out there about what is the ferocity of these natural disasters.  And I <i>understand</i> that.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;I understand it [peoples' anger].&rdquo;  
&ldquo;It [responses to the PM's responses to bushfire sufferers] is something that I will empathise with.&rdquo;  
&ldquo;It is something that I understand.&rdquo;

I think it is going to be difficult for Morrison to indefinitely continue claiming, side-by-side, these two assertions.  He can't just explicitly state something like &ldquo;I understand&rdquo;, or &ldquo;I empathise&rdquo;, expecting people to go on believing that this is true, at face value, just because he says so.  The question that now remains is: why does this discrepancy exist between the Prime Minister and quite a number of the people whom he wants to help? I suspect there may be two possibilities:

1. Generally speaking, the spoken word of our current Prime Minister, especially when required to answer questions on-the-fly, is such that it frequently and consistently does not appear to sit within the bounds of the grammatical rules of the English language, along with inappropriately associated word definitions.  Don't get me wrong: his English is not that bad.  But if you think about it, it's probably not that great either.  In this regard we would all slip up from time-to-time.  But my impression is that Scott Morrison seems to do this quite a lot, which happens to be very unfortunate for him in view of the huge amount of publicity that is given to him in his current job.  He is just going to have to accept the fact that if he continues to slip up in this regard then he will continue to have problems.  The reality is that he is not a very articulate individual and will probably often continue to be misunderstood for the remainder of his career in politics.
2. To echo the words of a certain Reformed Baptistic minister, our current Prime Minister simply does not understand suffering.  Specifically, it could be legitimately suggested, I think, that he may not have a very solid grasp on what in formal terms is sometimes called [Theodicy](https://www.gotquestions.org/theodicy.html).  In other words, the PM, as a Charismatic Evangelical Christian, possibly struggles (in a theoretical and practical sense) to adequately understand the problem of evil and suffering as it specifically relates to God and why He permits certain bad things to happen in the world.  Consequently, he may struggle greatly to put himself in other peoples' shoes and sincerely understand the sufferings of other people in a world that is a little outside of his own.

I do not know whether or not the PM actually, personally knows anyone who has been substantially and directly negatively impacted by the current bushfire crisis.  I also do not know from the guy himself as to what he personally believes about the explanation for why good people suffer in this world and how we should respond, both for ourselves and towards others.  But I do know that (a) he has said inappropriate things in the past which probably clearly demonstrate that he is very ignorant of others' lives and situations around him; and (b) he belongs to a denomination of Christianity which is quite well known for having a strong reputation for emphasising what is commonly labelled the [health and wealth prosperity gospel](https://www.thegospelcoalition.org/article/what-you-should-know-about-the-prosperity-gospel/).  It has received a lot of opposition in recent years, such as the following rather viral video from retired Baptist minister John Piper, which you can watch below:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/PTc_FoELt8s" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

One of the issues that does seem to be dividing both Evangelicalism and the rest of the wider world at the moment is the extent to which the prosperity gospel proportionally represents the Charismatic / Pentecostal movement as a whole.  Contrary to the claims that tend to come from secular media outlets, a lot of those within broader Evangelical circles would typically argue that Pentecostalism is drastically misrepresented by the media.  Personally, I am not quite so sure.

Perhaps I should preface this by saying that I do know a number of Pentecostal Christians personally who would not fit into the below categories.  But there are still some observations that could (perhaps should) be made:

As echoed and endorsed by Tim Challies, John MacArthur &ndash; who is quite frequently and emphatically outspoken against the Charismatic movement &ndash; has [rather boldly claimed](https://www.challies.com/interviews/john-macarthur-answers-his-critics/) that &ldquo;... Pew Forum data suggests that the prosperity gospel is actually a defining feature of all Pentecostalism; majorities of Pentecostals exceeding 90 percent in most countries hold to these beliefs.&rdquo;

It has been to the alarm of a lot of Christians (and quite fascinating to me) that academic and media outlets have been very publicly vocal concerning what kind of an influence Pentecostal theology might have on the PM's own theology and politics.  As only a few examples, [The Conversation](https://theconversation.com/) has published a couple of academic pieces [here](https://theconversation.com/explainer-what-is-pentecostalism-and-how-might-it-influence-scott-morrisons-politics-103530) (an article which was [re-published by the ABC](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2018-10-01/scott-morrison-and-pentecostalism/10325126)) and [here](https://theconversation.com/five-aspects-of-pentecostalism-that-shed-light-on-scott-morrisons-politics-117511).

OF course, unless Scott Morrison is prepared to sit down with someone and personally explain, as a primary source, what he believes about these things, we will never really know exactly what the truth is.  Biblically, this is what the [Mathew 18](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=matthew+18%3A15-18&version=CSB) principle would advise.  But I also don't think this justifies what quite a number of people seem to be expecting, namely that his personal beliefs, theology and politics should not be specifically questioned on the basis of the genuine denominational and theological influences that will have a significant part to play in his life.  The PM may not be a scholar, or a pastor but this does not exempt him from his beliefs and actions being biblically evaluated.  At the end of the day, judgement ultimately starts with the church ([1 Corinthians 5:12-13](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=1+cor+5%3A12-13&version=CSB)).  Because Scott Morrison claims to be a regenerate, converted, Evangelical believer, it is not picking favourites to say that it is the Biblically justified duty of any Christian to be harsher towards him than most other previous prime ministers, in spite of [Romans 13](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=rom+13%3A1-5&version=CSB).  Naturally, I will be inclined to come down on him harder than an unbelieving Prime Minister, simply because this outcome is unequivocally dictated by Scripture.

I hope that in the course of time, SM will learn to listen to what people have to say to him.  I hope he learns to try to understand suffering, rather than simply telling people, in words, that he understands when clearly, he does not understand a lot of things about the current situation, in terms of what it is really like for some people.