---
layout: post
title: "What Do Responses to Coronavirus and War of the Worlds Have in Common?"
date: 2020-03-06 14:05:27 +1100
categories: Society Culture SocialMedia Memes Media CoronaVirus ToiletPaperPanic.
description: "There are many traits that are not common, that chop and change across societies.  But there is one aspect of societal assumptions that doesn't ever seem to have changed for millennia..."
---

There are many traits that are not common, that chop and change across societies.  But there is one aspect of societal assumptions that doesn't ever seem to have changed for millennia: that is, a society's consistent, trending, general tendency to be incredibly gullible.

Quite a lot of people have probably at least heard of, if not read, [H. G. Wells](https://www.britannica.com/biography/H-G-Wells)' popular novel &ldquo;[The War of the Worlds](https://www.britannica.com/topic/The-War-of-the-Worlds-novel-by-Wells)&rdquo;.  It is a science-fiction (so **completely** fake, in case you didn't know) story about Martians who militantly invade the planet, destroy much of the population but then get destroyed themselves by the simple forces of nature, namely bacteria.  Since its publication, it has inspired the making of a number of movies, TV shows, as well as radio and audio dramas.

What some people may also be specifically aware of is the [1938 radio drama](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_War_of_the_Worlds_(1938_radio_drama)), adapted from the book itself.  It is fascinating to [examine the psychological and sociological implications of this radio broadcast](https://www.wnycstudios.org/podcasts/radiolab/articles/war-worlds).  There is a certain amount of controversy as to how much of an impact it really had on the wider community.  But it could be argued that to an extent, quite a number of people believed the story to be true, leaving their homes for fear of an inter-planetary invasion.  What is even more intriguing is the extent to which the stunt has been quite successfully pulled off at least twice more: once in 1949 and again in 1968, the former of the two broadcasts incurring disastrous consequences.  If you want to find out what happened then you can freely listen to the podcast linked above.

In a mildly similar fashion, at the time of this writing in today's post-postmodern world, there is a major issue currently &lsquo;plaguing&lsquo; the minds of the world's population &ndash; an issue which is itself a very real and legitimate issue.  But it is also producing some very strange habits in the behaviours of some of the people of this volatile world that we live in.  The issue in question, of course, is the [2019 strain of the Coronavirus, a disease of Chinese geographical origin](https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019).  One of the strangest trends, or fads, that has been produced by this disease (or rather, peoples' responses to the disease) is what is fast becoming known &ndash; embarrassingly, internationally known &ndash; as the virtually Australiocentric &ldquo;[toilet paper panic](https://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-51731422)&rdquo;.  For some reason, many Aussies have gotten the idea into their heads that they need to stock up in advance on loads of toilet paper, perhaps because they are worried about having to quarantine themselves, not being able to leave their house and then not being able to buy any more, or perhaps because they are concerned about there not being enough paper to go round, based on the astounding (and unfortunately partially true) assumption that everybody else is helping to buy up and consume all the remaining precious rolls.

There are multiple observations that fascinate me about this new and very particular buying trend:
* It is a decision, or behaviour, that is simply based on uninformed assumptions.  I do not know of any expert who has made the recommendation to stock up on toilet paper as a precautionary measure against the disease.  I have no idea what authority people are relying on to engage in this process but it just makes no sense.  Maybe it is fake news from social media.  Specifically, maybe it is a panic produced by superficial click-bait and memes; although considering how many hilarious memes have been produced in absolute mockery of what people are doing, you would think that even the most gullible people in this world would have woken up a long time ago.  This whole process is a classic example of what professional philosophers and logicians would call [appealing to authority](https://philosophy.lander.edu/scireas/authority.html), a well-recognised formal logical fallacy.  At the risk of being repetitious, this situation is a good example of how and why, in many instances, assumptions from common sense are not always valid and should not always prevail.
* It is plain weird.  The action itself is weird and it makes the people who are doing it look weird.  ON a personal note, I find it interesting that I have not yet come across anyone within my own social circles who has actually bought into the idea of stocking up on one, two or three-ply essentials.  Maybe it's just that I have actually managed to surround myself with mostly balanced, intelligent friends and family.  I don't know.  But there must be no small number of people who are pulling the paper off the shelves, because so many supermarkets now have completely bare shelves to cater for the bare bottoms of the thousands upon thousands of desperate consumers desiring lower bodily cleanliness.  Only yesterday, my mother went to the shops to buy some toilet paper, only because we were running out and genuinely needed some new rolls for one of our toilets.  However, achieving this goal required a certain amount of availability hunting.  There were no packages available in Coles, nor were there apparently any available in one of the somewhat nearby IGA's.

How have we (some of us at least) gotten ourselves to this stage? Maybe some people are still innocently on hyper-alert due to the recent bushfires.  But maybe, frankly, some people are just not very intelligent.  Whatever the reason, we need to make an effort to educate people that wasting toilet paper like this is not a viable practical method of dealing with the Coronavirus.

For some reason, societies of various kinds (particularly Western society) has always been at least moderately largely populated by people who don't seem to have a strong concept of how to think critically.  Especially when people lose hope and do not have a well-thought out plan for the future, panic settles in and if we let it get to our heads, sometimes there is not very much that other people can do to stop it from happening.  All we can do is just keep on reminding people that it is not the end of the world, the battle goes on and we must find more authentically practical means of dealing with a menace such as a certain physical disease.  A disease which may have associated (if not increased risks) attached to its existence, yet which also is being contained, as best as can be managed,  by governmental measures which seem to be helping to slow down its negative impact on individuals' lives and society at large.

We live **in** a great big stupid world, folks.  But don't try too hard to become part **of** it.

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/ot_G9CEHw2Y" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>