---
layout: post
title: "Family, Business, Emergencies, Theology -- A Legitimate Prime Ministerial Dilemma, Part I"
date: 2020-01-04 13:59:16 +1100
categories: Politics Theology Business Scomo PMAust Bushfires AustBushfires2019-20.
description: "... A new year has begun.  But life has not given us much of a chance to settle in.  And in amongst the many on-going issues of significance facing the nation, especially the incredibly numerous and big bushfires, it seems our Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is in trouble..."
---

This is part I of a two-part series of posts concerning the personal (corporate, political and ideological) responses that have come from Australia's current Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, in response to the bushfire crisis ravaging this country at the moment.  Part II can be viewed [here](https://sugarcanens.github.io/politics/theology/business/scomo/pmaustbushfires/austbushfires2019-202020/01/07/PM-Theodicy.html).

So, 2020 has finally arrived.  A new year has begun.  But life has not given us much of a chance to settle in.  And in amongst the many on-going issues of significance facing the nation, especially the incredibly numerous and big bushfires, it seems our Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is in trouble... again.

Perhaps this is too oversimplified but it does seem that there are at least two major, immediate problems facing him in his current position.  One of them is a pragmatic issue of personal and political priorities; the other being an issue of philosophical, and relational sensitivity towards others.  With regard to the former, he has some of my sympathy.  But unfortunately, the latter of the two in particular appears to be having social and emotional consequences on others that he is [emphatically, wilfully ignoring](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-03/scott-morrison-responds-to-angry-criticism-bushfire-victims/11839674).

Those who know enough about my politics would probably have a pretty solidly accurate notion that generally speaking, I have not always been the greatest fan of our current PM.  Having said that, however, I do sympathise, at least a little, with an intriguingly intricate problem he seems to be facing, which I suspect, if it had occurred as long as only a decade ago, may or may not have been quite as much of an issue for him.  This is the first problem I alluded to earlier.  It culminates in complicated questions resulting from the ever-increasingly jostling, ordinal prioritisation of some of the things that have a direct, substantial impact upon Morrisons personal life, publicly and privately.  At the risk of being repetitious, these are things which drastically, functionally change the interaction he has with his family, his job and the situations (especially emergency issues) which affect both of these things.  But answers to these questions also have implications on the future of our country.  And I think some people are finding it difficult to know where to draw the line, between Morrison's somewhat justified personal priorities and the priorities of the people.  Perhaps the PM himself is finding this a confusing process as well.

Arguably, one of the first developments along these lines was Scott Morrison's family holiday, which he [curiously cancelled several days ago](https://www.smh.com.au/national/i-accept-the-criticism-scott-morrison-apologises-for-family-holiday-20191222-p53m6o.html).
This was followed by that equally fascinating issue with him additionally cancelling his business trip to India(see [duplicate article above](https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-01-03/scott-morrison-responds-to-angry-criticism-bushfire-victims/11839674)).  These are steps that he has taken, allowing him to be closer to home during the unfolding emergency situation.  But I also find this whole process, if only circumstantially, to be a little uncomfortable.

First, regarding his family holiday: it is interesting that the PM seems to have mostly initiated the process of cancellation himself.  As strange as it may seem to some, this is an action that I do not quite understand justification for.  Should he really have needed to do this? I certainly understand if Morrison did not wish to create an awkward PR problem, for himself and his government, which appears to be obvious when he stated, in a press conference at the NSW RFS headquarters in Sydney, according to the already-linked article from the Sydney Morning Herald above:
<blockquote>I get it that people would have been upset to know that I was holidaying with my family while their families were under great stress.</blockquote>
<blockquote>But I'm comforted by the fact that Australians would like me to be here, just simply so I can be here, alongside them as they're going through this terrible time ... and I apologise for that.</blockquote>

Maybe that's fair enough, out of respect for those who are in danger and especially those who have lost their homes, even their lives.  But is this really something that should be socially expected of a PM whenever there is a major emergency? In some ways, the PM is just like a lot of other Aussies: he has a family, a job, with moral obligations towards both.  How much should Morrison's  family be expecting him to put them on hold, addressing issues of national concern at their expense, rather than simply allowing the acting Prime Minister to do his job? It is not exactly like every other family in this country is necessarily going to be putting their current family holidays on hold either.  In that sense, the PM's job is probably not quite as precious as some may expect it to be.  Why can the PM not have something like a moderately normal life, even under the current circumstances? It is in emergency situations like this where Deputy PM Michael McCormack, is able to step in as acting Prime Minister to sort things out.  If Morrison has to come back nearly every time there is an emergency impacting upon innocent lives, then this is going to become problematic.  Mostly satirically speaking, the question could be asked: why should we even bother with an acting PM in the first place? I can see no strong functional benefit, neither for the PM, nor his family, nor the nation, resulting from his decision to return home, given the democratic process already put in place to cater for situations when he happens to be away anyway.  There is hardly a substantial reason why it should have been considered a negative reflection on the PM's reputation if he had, instead, stayed away.  In spite of the opposition to other decisions Morrison has made with regard to the current bushfire season, it could also be said that it is (almost) like there is supposed to be  a societal impression, in some places, that <b>Big Daddy Scomo</b> is going to look after everything and that we will all magically be okay if we just let him sit alongside us on home soil.  But at the end of the day, it probably does not &ndash; and will not &ndash; make a huge difference to anyone.

There is also the concern presented by Morrison alluding to the suggestion that his holiday was the fulfilment of a promise he allegedly made to his children.  Most people in our increasingly pluralistic, if not secularised, society will not realise the problem this presents.  But more than likely, I wonder if this could be more than a basic ethical and relational consideration towards his family, especially his children.  Our current PM is an Evangelical (specifically [Pentecostal](https://www.gotquestions.org/Charismatic-movement.html)) Christian, endeavouring, as one would expect, to apply the Bible to his every-day life, which Pentecostals tend to do much more prescriptively than some other Evangelical denominations and churches.  It could be noted that the [New Testament](https://www.britannica.com/topic/New-Testament) contains an explicit biblical instruction that fathers must &ldquo;... not <i>exasperate</i> [their] children, so that they won’t become <i>discouraged,</i>&rdquo; ([Colossians 3:21](https://www.biblegateway.com/passage/?search=col+3&version=CSB)).  I have no idea what it is like to be the PM and who knows, maybe I would do the same thing if I were in his shoes.  But to be honest, regardless of what people would think of me, if I was him, I would probably have just gone on with my holiday and then addressed any potential PR issues after I got back.  But in that case, I would probably also have included biblical justifications, which in consideration of the PM's somewhat intellectually dishonest statements on keeping his faith private and separate from his politics, I suspect he may not have been prepared to do.

Second, A very similar issue could be raised with his trip to India.  Again, I really cannot even begin to imagine the pressure that the PM is under at the moment.  But if I was PM, I think I would still have gone ahead with that trip as well.  Would I have run the risk of potentially losing the next election as a consequence? I don't know.  Maybe.  But a good PM, I think, would not have the salvation of his next term as the highest priority in view.

Again, maybe he is just trying to avoid a potential, if not probable PR problem.  If so then good for him.  But does it really matter that much? The pragmatic, political and corporate reality is that for the rest of the world, business simply has no choice but to go on as usual, not in spite of but certainly in addition to a bushfire national emergency.  IN order to help maintain political stability, why can, or should, the PM not continue with his usual duties, whilst leaving the emergency situation up to the acting PM? Theoretically, one would think that such a procedure would result in less catching up to do, both for the PM himself and by extension for the rest of the country.  Is that really so difficult?

I suppose in a couple of ways the following situational example may not be entirely comparable.  But I am reminded of either a talk, or Q&A session that I once sat through at the [Yackandandah Mens Camp](https://yackmenscamp.org/) several years ago, where one of the main speakers was former Deputy Prime Minister [John Anderson](https://johnanderson.net.au/about/).  One of the stories he told was about the time he was acting Prime Minister during [9/11](http://theconversation.com/world-politics-explainer-the-twin-tower-bombings-9-11-101443).  This was more of an immediate issue for America but it did have ramifications that impacted the entire world to an extent.  The PM at that time, John Howard, was away in the US itself at the time.  Even though they still had to have some direct conversations, both Howard and Anderson were able to get the job done and keep running the country while going their own separate ways, in their own places.

At the moment, our country is in a very tense spot.  Our PM is in a difficult position.  But perhaps, from a political and legal standpoint, there are better ways of managing the situation from both ends?

[Continue to part II](https://sugarcanens.github.io/politics/theology/business/scomo/pmaustbushfires/austbushfires2019-202020/01/07/PM-Theodicy.html).